11 sections 
Section 1: Getting started 
    Course structure
        Project Based Course
        Highly engaging approach to learn Power Bi

    PDF 200+ pages
    Quizzes and Assignments with step by step solutions videos
    You will need to complete a bonus project to test your abilities and apply the skills developed throughout the course to a brand new data set.

    1. Introducing Power Bi  
        Install the tool 
    2. Connect & shape data 
    3. Create models 
    4. Calculate measures with DAX
    5. Visualizing Data with Dashboards
    6. Optimizing Power Bi performance

    ---
    Resources
    1. Power Bi for BI.pdf 
    2. AdventureWorks Raw Data.zip 
    3.AdventureWorks Images.zip 
    4. AdventureWorks PBIX Files.zip
        I downloaded them and placed them in my assets>powerBi folder. 
    ---

    Adventure Works 
        Fictional cycling equipment and accessories manufactoring company 

        Brief 
            track KPIS
                sales, revenue, profit, returns
            compare regional performance, 
            analyze product-level trends, 
            identify high value customers

    Objective 
        Use Power BI to
            Connect and transform the raw data
            build a relational data model 
            create calculated columns and measures with DAX
            design an interactive dashborad to visualize the data


    Setting expectations 
        1. Your screen may not always match mine. Updates may introduce differences. 
        2. This course is desgined to help you build foundational skills 
        3. Hands on and project based learning experience. Follow on closely   
        4. Power BI service is not included

Section 2: Introducing Microsoft Power BI desktop 
    Topics to cover
        1. Introduce Power Bi 
        2. Installation
        3. Interface & workflow
        4. Power Bi vs Excel
        5. Adjusting Settings
        6. Helpful Resources

   Goals for this section 
        1. Download and install power Bi 
        2. Understand the role that Power Bi plays
        3. Explroe core components of the power BI Interface
        4. Review the BI workflow that we'll follow as we build our couse project 

    What is power BI? 
    self service BI platform,
    desktop and web based applications for 
    connecting, modeling and visualizing data

    Why power BI? 
    It allows you to connect, transform and load millions of rows of data. 
    YOu can build relational models to blend data from multiple sources
    Define complex calculations using Data Analysis Expressions (DAX)
    Bring data to life with interactive reports and Dashboards
    Develop a versatile, in demand skill set 

    Excel vs Power Bi 
    Excel
    Spreadsheets, pivot tables, A1 Notation, cell formulas

     Power BI 
     report view, custom visuals, interactive dasboards, power Bi service 

     In common 
     Power Query 
     Data Model 
     DAX 

    Excel and Power Bi are built on top of the same analytics engines. 

    Power Bi takes the same data tranformation and modeling capabilities and adds powerful visualization and publishing tools. 
    Transition is easy. From Excel to powerBi and viceversa. 

    DOWNLOAD 
    You can either go to 
        Web page, but 
            you download a .exe file that will need administrator access and will not automatically Update

            or 
        Microsoft store (choose this)
            Best. Auto update and no need to grant administrator access. 
        

    Setting Power BI 
    Global > Preview Features 
        select all, apparently each month they tend to apply changes so maybe checking it from time to time will be needed. 

    Current File > Data Load 
        Unselect: 
            Update or delete relationships when refreshing data, 
            Autodetect new relationships after data is loaded 
                for the purpose of this course we want to generate them not allowing the program to automatically make them. 
            Time intelligence > auto date|time 

    Note: Current file settings should be adjusted in each file. 

    Power Bi Workflow 
    1.Extract and transform data in the Power Query editor -Back End
    2.Load the data in the Power Bi - Front End. 
    3.Data View 
    4.Report View
    {Query, Model View, Data View, Report View}

    1. Get data
        Either Excel, SQL, CSV or else. 
    You select your data source from either Get Data button or Transform Data and click on close and apply to load. 

    2. model view. At the left side. 

    3. Data view or table view. 
        Depending on the data that you select different menus will be accesible. i.e. a column or a table.

    4. Report View. 
        Add graphs and visuals in different pages. 

    End of user interface 

    Power Bi is in constant updating, monthly generally so new features may be added. 

Power Bi services allows to publish data and collaborate in real time with peers. 

Section 3: Connecting and Shaping Data 
    AdventureWorks project
        connect, shape and transform data using power Query 

    Load Data 
    Explore the common techniques for extracting, cleaning and shaping data for modeling and analysis. 

    Topics to cover 
    1. Intro to Power Query 
    2. Query Editor 
    3. Data QA & Profiling 
    4. Data connectors
    5. Calendar tools 
    6. Connection MOdes 
    7. Table Transformations 
    8. Combining Queries

    Goals for this section 
    >Explore Power BIs query editor and understand the role that power query plays in the larger Bi workflow 
    >Introduce different types of connectors and connectivity modes for getting datta into power bi 
    >Review tools for checking data quality and key profiling metrics like col distribution, empty values, errors and outliers
    >Transform table susing text, numerical and date/time tools, pivot and group records, and create new conditional columns 
    >Practice combining, modifying and refreshing queries

    Front End vs Back End 
    Front 
        Data, Model & report views 

    Back 
        Power Query Editor (raw data is ETL)

    Back 
        Connect and extract data 
        profile & QA 
        Transform & shape
        merge or append queries
        advanced transformations using M code 

    Front 
        Build data models by creating table relationships between keys 
        Add calculated measures & columns using DAX 
        Design reports to visualize the data and create interactive, dynamic Dashboards
        Publish and share your power Bi 

    Data Connectors 
        Acces data. 
            From virtually anywhere 
            flat files (CSV, text, xlsx, etc)
            databases (SQL, Access, Oracle, IBM, etc.)
            power platform (Datasets, Datamarts, Dataflows, Dataverse, etc.)
            Azure (Azure SQL, Analysis Services, Databricks, etc.)
            Online Services (SharePoint, Github, Dynamics, Google Analytics, salesforce, Power Bi service)
            Other (web feeds, R scripts, Spark, Hadoop, etc.)

        Wow the Get Data menu really holds an extended list of all possible sources. Most of them i dont even know them. 

        "Once you correctly entered the connector details and authenticated the credentials you always arrive at the same result: Query Editor" 
        On experience you connect the data and it opens a preview window with the name of the file and a sample. 
            Then, you can either load or transform the data. Transform data leads you to the query editor. 

    
    1st Load Completed. Looks like an excel type of format but with different options even R or python scripts.
    Next we go to explore the
    
    Power Query Editor 
    Home section is where you spend most of the time applying transformations and calculations.
    Then there is a badge with formulas known to be written in "M" code. 
        M code automatically writes itself when applying formulas when you are advanced at power BI sometimes you write it yourself too. \
    Very similar is VBA. Visual basic.

    Left side we got the Queries vertical badge. 
        Lists all of our queries. 
        All connections or queries are there. 
        You can edit the properties here. 

    Table preview, most of the screen: where data is. 

    At the right side the vertical badge named query settings holds the name of the table which should make sense and be human readable. 
        In contrast with SQL or python the names are not snake or camel case. Just humane, just write briefly and descriptively what that table represents.
    This vertical badge also has the log of actions, the applied steps, the macro of the adjustments that you have made to the document. 

    3 primary tabs
        1. Home
            General settings and common transformation tools
        2. Transform 
            Tools to modify exsiting columns
                Splitting, grouping, transposing, extracting text, etc. 
        3. Add column 
            Create brand new columns. 
            Based on conditional rules, text operations, calculations, dates, etc. 
Home
    Basic Table Transformations. (Home)
    Choose columns or remove columns. 
    Keep rows or remove rows. 
        Also has remove duplicates. 
            Sometimes you need to get rid of headers, totals...

    There is also sort and data type buttons.
    And, although not home related you can access most functions by using right click on the columns. 

---
    I connected to the csv Product Lookup 
        I saw in applied steps the source with the location information, comma delimeter, else. 
        Also promoted headers and changed type where in M formula you can see each type of data selected for each column. 

    Changing the data type to Currency.Type did not function as the video course.

    Gold standard habits
        Adjust table names
        Review|Confirm data types

First Assignment
    Table transformations

7 assignments 
1. Create queries to connect two new .csv files 
2. Name your queries 
    Product Category Lookup and Product Subcategory Lookup 
3. Confirm that column headers have been promoted and that all data types are correct
4. Add a new column
    To extract all characters before the dash ("-") in the Product SKU col
        name it SKU Type 
5. Update the SKU Type 
6. Replace Zeros (0) in the Product Style column with "NA" 
7. Close and load to your data model 

Ok so connections where easy I changed the name. 
To add a new column where I extract the values from the reference col: 
    I used right click add column from examples and power BI found the pattern when writing two examples.
    Another solution is to go to the tab Add column and select extract place the delimiter and done. 

Then to update the col to have the values until the second delimeter I sed the M code. adding a comma and a 1 as it is zero based. 
Another solution is to go to the applied steps adjust button advanced and place 1. Which in context makes less sense as it reads as if it will skip just 1 delimeter instead of knowing that the code is 0 based. 

Then replace the values with click on the column replace values 0 for NA.


Storage & Connection Modes 
    Import 
    Dataset is less than 1 GB 
    Source data does not change frequently 
    No restrictions o power Query, modeling and DAX. 

    Direct Query 
    Dataset is too large to be stored in memory 
    Source data changes frequently and reports must reflect changes 
    Company policy states that data can only be accessed from the original source

    Composite Model 
    Boost performance by setting appropriate storage for each table 
    Combine a DirectQuery model with additional imported data 
    Create a single model from two or more DirectQuery models

    Live connection 
    create one dataset that serves as a central source of truth 
    Analyst teams can create different analysis from the same dataset 
    multi developer team to advance on separate functions each one changes the data the other visualizes it. 

    Connecting to a Database 
    PowerQuery 
        Can connect to data from various database sources including SQL server, MS access, MySQL, PostgreSQL, ORACLE, SAP & more. 

    Steps to load a mysql database 
        Set server number 
            Database name (advanced options to place limits)
                ok. = Data loaded.

        In the tables or queries with right click one can click in enable load to not load the tables in the future report. 
            This way we can use the data for intermediate steps to make a better formatted table without clogging or spending computational resources. 

    

    Load from a Web connector so a url that has any structured table can be identified scraped by Power Query. 

    Data QA & Profiling tools 
    Tools 
        Column quality 
        column distribution 
        column profile 
            So we use this parameters to explore the data prior to loading it into Power Bi

    In the view tab of query editor 
    There is the option to display the quality values of the data by clicking in blank squares which is separated into valid, error and empty. 
        The number of each type of quality can be known by hovering over each percentage and by clicking the options menu or the 3 points we can take actions like removing or keeping duplicates, empty values or errors. 

    Col distribution
        Enumerates the distinct and unique records. 

    Column profile 
        Holistic view and statistics
            Count, 
            Distinct count,
            unique, 
            min and max. 

    Note: the statistics are based on the first 1000 rows one must click on a botton at the left bottom to consider the entire dataset

    To explore the errors click on keep errors and select each. 

    To clean the errors and empty values well click on remove errors then remove empty values. The steps will be registered and can be reverted in the applied steps section. 

    Duplicates can be useful so it is necessary to have awareness before deciding to remove them. But still it is an action that can be clicked. 

    ---
    Text tools 
    All in the transform tab at the right side. Text column 
    Format a text column allows to apply lowercase, uppercase, trim, clean or add prefixes or sufixes. 
    Extract function can be set to all before or after a delimeter, by lenght, first or last characters. 

    Next Assignment 
    Text tools 

    So imagine you get an email saying: 
    Hi! 
    We re looking to better understand where our customer may be coming from, based on their email domains. 
    Could you please create a new column in the customer table that will allow us do to this? 

    Thanks!
    -ETL

    Objectives to achieve the task 

    1. Duplicate the email address column and name it "Domain Name"
    2. In the new column, remove all text/characters except for the domain name 
    3. Use transformation steps to clean up and capitalize the domain names 
    4. Save & apply changes.

    Duplicate, name, then the interesting extract all after "@"

    Then I replaced .com with nothing so to remove it and replaced - with a space then capitalized 

    The solution made the same and then stayed with everything before .com. 
    Same result 

    Numerical tools 
    basic stats sum, min/max, average, count, count distinct

    standard, scientific and trinometry allow for simple to complex operations from addition to sine, tangent and else. 

    So the Actual practice of numerical tools. 
    
    In the transform tab you can find statistics.
    Numerical operations may vary according to the data type but some usual operations can be counting distinct, average, sum. 
        Interesting enough it counts as an applied step and is usually just for exploration purposes not for final dashboards. 

    You can apply rounding and decide the amount. 

    Or multiply times 0.9 to make a new discount price column. 

    Assignment Arrived: 

    Hi again, 
    Leadership is asking us to validate some high-level stats about our products and customers. Can you please help me answer the following questions? 

    We don't really need to store these values anywhere, so make sure to restore the tables back to their original state once you're done pulling the stats. 
    Thank you!
    -ETL 


    Lets do the assignment 
    Objectives 

    1. What is our average product cost? 
    2. Determine in how many colors do we sell our products. 
    3. How many distinct customers do we have? 
    4. What is the maximum annual customer income? 
    5. Return the tables to their original state 

    What i did to solve each objective/step. 

    First enter query by right clicking on the model view in the product lookup table selecting edit query. 
        Go to column ProductCost, select the column, go to the transform tab, statistics and select average. Voila = 413.6$ dlls as the average price. p.d eliminate the step.
    Second step: select Product color column go to transform tab and select count distinct under the statistics button and the answer is 10 different colors. 
    Third step: close the product lookup table and open the query of customer lookup. Select the customer key column and under transform statistics click on count distinct values which gives a total of 18148 customers. 
    4th step. Select AnnualIncome transform>statistics>maximum = 170000 $ dlls annually. 

    Easy like 3 minutes haha.

    Date and Time tools 

    In the add column tab. 
    Age: difference between the current date and the date in each rows
    Date only: removes the time component from a date/time field
    year/month/quarter/week/day extracts individual components
    earliest/latest evaluates the date from a column as a single value *this is in transform menu or tab. 

    ok so i loaded the table and checked the earliest which is like a minimum but for dates. 
    in add column clicking on name of day adds well the name of the day of each date value. 
    start of week. you can actually change the day that you mark as start so 1 in the M code or adjust in the applied steps would be a monday, two tuesday and so on, by default is sunday.
        Instead of 1 to make it readable you can place Day.Monday. 
    Start of month. Also consider selecting the correct column when making the new ones, not out of a start of week but the original date column. 
    

    Change Data Type with Locale 
    Left click the data type icon in the column header and select the using locale option, select data type and language. 
    Serves to avoid data formatting variations as not all places have the days and months in the same place. 

    Ok so here they used a date error table and I seem not to have that document so I just viewed the changing of data types instead of following through. 

    Pro Tip 
    Rolling Calendars. 
    Based on the current data time. So it evolves. 

    Get data > blank query > name it rolling calendar. 

    Ok so I first made an initial date 
    =#date(2020,1,1)

    Then, used an M formula to make a range of dates as a list. 
        = List.Dates(
        Source, 
        Number.From(DateTime.LocalNow()) - Number.From(Source), 
        #duration(1, 0, 0, 0)
        )
    
    Then renamed the column to Date and added new calculated date columns (year, start of month, start of quarter) shamely then just close it not save (it was just an example)

    Now, the real one starting from 2023 and using the same M formula. 
    Nevermind, with just changing the initial source from 1/1/2020 to 1/1/2023 the next example excercise could be achieved. So thats what i did. 

    Assignment: Calendar tables

    Hi,
    we need to add a few fields to our calendar table to help us analyze sales trending over time. 
    could you please add the following columns when you get a chance? 
    -ETL 

    Add the following columns to the calendar table: 
    Month Name 
    Month Number
    Start of Year 
    Year 

    Very easy excercise so just importing the table data. 
    Then adding columns selecting date and from there each field by clicks Month Name, Month Number, Start of Year, Year. 

    Index Columns 
    In add column tab
        Contains a list of sequential values that can be used to identify each unique row. Starting from either 0 or 1 and growing towards infinity. 
        Index serve to create unique IDs. 

    Conditional columns 
    Also in Add column tab. 
    They define new fields based on logical rules and conditions (IF/then)
        You can make a column out of order quantity (single =1, >1, other),
    
    So then I continued with importing the sales data from year 2022 changing the name of the file and making an index in the add column tab starting from 1. 
    So we (the guy in the course video and me I guess) removed the index and interesting enough the applied steps did not disappear just the column so the index still exist, 
    still is an applied step that holds information even without the formal column. 
    Ok, then we did removed the 3 steps (making of the index, changing its position and removing it) done, now index is forever gone. 
    Lets add a conditional column. 
        if order quantity = 1
        else if >1 multiple items. 
    
    Calculated column best practices
    Table transformations and col calculations should ideally happen as close to the original data source as possible, to optimize performance and speed. 

    upstream to downstream > 
    Data Source > Power Query > Power Bi Front-End > Published Reports


    Grouping and Aggregating Data
    Transform tab. 
    Group by button. 
        Aggregates data at a different level or "Grain" 
        so with aggregating you can see information/records that are usually daily compressed into monthly or by store. 

    Group by 
    Choose a column 
    Name the column to be made, the operation type, and the output. 
    
    In advanced settings you can apply multiple grouping columns. 
    So as an example Product key and Customer key 
    total quantity, sum, order quantity 

    This is like creating a Pivot Table in excel and pulling in sum of order quantity
    Grouping is basically similar to pivoting

    So a practicing step was loading the complete data in product key and grouping by the count of orders of each product. 
    Then the steps were removed so then again now more advanced. 

    Grouping product key, customer key. 

    Pivoting and Unpivoting
    Is the process of turning distinct row values into columns, and unpivoting describes the process of turning distinct columns into rows. 

    transpose makes a column out of each row. 

    Then, i passed through an excercise of unpivoting. 
        So I imported the product category sales file, selected 3 columns those of regions and in the transform tab selected unpivot and rename to region and quantity sold respectively. 
        Theeeeen, pivot them again.
        Then delete the steps so it was just a practice. 

    so it is a big file in terms of rows and transposing makes no sense but still we did it and removed it. 

    Merging Queries 
    On a conserved column between tables a new merged table is made. 
    So it is a join. 

    example
    Merge sales data with product lookup on Product Key. 

    Merging adds columns. Make a wider column. 

    Not because you can merge one must sometimes having data in partialities is more expressive. 
    So when merging there are two options in the home tab. Either expand the table with merge queries or make a new column with the merge. 
        When clicking on merge you select the tables and the kind of join. 
        In this example left outer was selected which is the kind of join that just adds to the left column the rows that matched in the second.
        A column with just table repeated in each row appeared. An extra step should be perform. So click on the right corner of the col and select the columns to add or all. 
        Product key, ProductName, ProductColor where selected. 
        Now we can name the columns if desired. We can consider removing the repeated product key or else. 

    Sometimes merging adds redundancy so one should do it with consciousness or leave the separated related tables for now the merge was dissolved/eliminated. 

    Appending Queries
    So it is a concatenation or adding of rows from two or more tables. 
    It is a stack of rows or combination. 

    Ex. 
    Appending sales 2020 with sales 2021

    An option to append all files in a folder is: 
    Folder Get Data > More > Folder and all files within a specified folder (assuming shared structure) get appended and if new same structure files are added it is a matter of refreshing the query for them to be appended as well. 

    Also I made an appended query as new using the 3 files of Sales data 2020 to 2022. 
    Then deleted it and one of the tables that fed the concatenated/combined Sales data 2020 to 2022 table. 

    Appending files from folder. 
    So as I eliminated the 3 sales data files I have them as well in a folder. 
    To import click on get data or new source > more > folder > go to known path of the folder > combine and transform data or just transform data and then we concatenate either works. 
        I clicked on transform. 
        Funny enough we see just attributes of the files not the actual data. 
        The first column has a clickable on the corner combine files button and displays a window with the data and now we are on the data. 
    
    From folder we have the data but also an added column of Source.Name so where the data comes from and we can delete it. 
        Side note some files are made while combining by this method and they can be just collapsed to hide them. 
        Those files are the internal process to combine the files and actually if we add files on that folder with the same structure they will combine as well. Sometimes refreshing may be needed to see the updated data. 

    Data source settings
    used for when a file path breaks and we need to change it to a working one. 
    A reason for a path to break can be changing the name of the file, a folder or moving the file. 

    So in the data source settings button there is a function to browse for files, a way to solve file path breaks. 
        Same step can be applied from source in applied steps. 

    Pro Tip: Data Source parameters
    Dinamic Data Source parameters. 
    They help to manage complex projects which use several schemas. 
        Manage and update connection paths in the Power Query Editor. 

    There is a button manage parameters to make maybe new working spaces as a parameter with its actual folder or files. 
        Funny enough a parameter can be used to access/establish a database connection so as an exaple a SQL connection. 

    the source can be an M formula to establish a connection
        i.e. = MySQL.Database("127.0.0.1", "database", [ReturnSingleDatabase=true])
        server, database, can be accesed and set by clicking on source in applied steps. 
    
    The course guy set a parameter named: Server (especify name); to establish a connection with a specific sql server.
        current value: server number i.e. 127.0.0.1
    The parameter is added to the list of queries and updates the M formula so as to say Server (name of the parameter) instead of 127.0.0.1., #Database (name of the list of values of the parameter)


    Refreshing Queries 
    There is a button in the home tab. 

    Pro tip: Click on include in report refresh of each table it is a right click on the tables of power query editor to exclude static data or lookups. 
        This step avoids attempting to refresh data that has not changed. 


    Importing Excel Models 
    Sometimes a model, additional metadata on data, can be done in excel or passed to you and you can acces it in Power Bi. 
    import > Power Query, Power pivot, Power View. 
        Imported models retain data source connections and queries, 
        query editing procedures and steps, 
        table relationships, hierarchies, field settings, 
        All calculated columns and DAX measures. 

    So it was a demo I did not have the file but I saw the process of importing into excel. 

    Power Query Best Practices 
    Get organized before connecting and loading data. 
        Define clear and intuitive query names. 
        Organized file/folder structure. 
    Disable report refresh for static data sources. 
    When working with large tables, only load the data you need. 
        Dont include innecesary data. It slows the process. 

Creating a Data Model 
    Involves normalization, fact and dimension tables, primary and foreign keys, relationship cardinality and filter flow. 
    Also hierarchies, common schemas

    Goals: 
    Understand the basic principles of data modeling (normalization, fact & dimension tables and common schemas)
    Create table relationships using keys and discuss cardinality 
    Configure report filters and trace filter context as part between related tables in the model 
    Explore Data modeling options like hierarchies, data categories and hidden fields.
    
    Modeling 101 
    Independent tables is not a model. So knowing how they connect is. 
    Interesting to explore and register the types of relationships but in beginning having the relationships allows to make aggregation processes, even without merging. 

    Ok so to make visuals we go to the report view tab, make a visual such as matrix and input values out of columns of one or more tables as well as maybe the names of the products or rows just as an example. 

    Database Normalization 
    Process of organizing the tables and columns in a relational database to reduce redundancy and preserve data integrity. 
        Eliminate redundant data. 
        Minimize errors and anomalies. 
        Improves processing time. 
        simplify queries and structure the database for meaningful analysis

    In a normalized base each table should serve a distinct and specific purpose only. 
        one of product information, other of transaction records, customer attributes, store details and so on. 
    
    having only connected tables makes a lot of redundant data more cardinality. duplicated data. 
    out of a transaction and product detils table you can duplicate the column product id field and separate them to have transactions so just how much of each product daily is selling and another of the details. Info can be connected but is neatly organized. 


    Fact and dimension tables
    fact = data, dimension = lookup 
    dimension is usually information that can ser for filtering or grouping. 
    Data are metrics used for summarization. 

    fact (sales, orders, transactions)
    dimension (products, customers, date, stores, )

    If you know some key information then you know the rest of the data, there goes the logic and by that key you connect the table. 
        i.e. product id then you know the name, size, weight. 

    Wow. First time I saw a completely fact table, just keys and quantifiables. 

    Ok in the model view. 
        To make a connection between each table: 

            Select a table>properties> key column > well define/select the column key of each. 


    Relationships vs merged tables 
    why not just having a big table with all the data. 
    Redundancy, more memory and processing power compared to relational modeling. 

    Model View 
    Parts
        Menu Ribbon
        Model Canvas
        Properties pane
        view options 
        tabs 

    ways to create the connections/relationships between tables 
        1. Click and drag 
        2. manage relationships button in the ribbon 

    manage > new > 
        From table > to table (select tables and click on ok)
            you can also define the type of cardinality relation but was not needed. 

    and the click and drag take the second table the column of connection and drag it towards the primary key of another table and done. 
        In my case the writing manage relationships openned in the guy of the course it didn't. 
        I noticed you can see that table to manage the relationship from the right properties pane. And it was cool making the relationships and seeing a previous visualization gain sense out of just that connection. 


    Managing and Editing Relationships
        manage relationships button > edit 
            Allows to activate or deactivate relationships and manage cardinality and filter direction. 
        So out of experience a window jumps with the names of the tables and if there are relationships between columns they appear in gray. By selecting another column a relationship is edited if pressed ok. 

        Delete 
        Right click on the line and delete option. 

    Model schemas
    STAR & Snowflake schemas 

    star 
    a fact table surrounded by dimensional ones 

    even if the form does not make a star it is a star shchema. 

    Snowflake
    includes relations between dimension and related sub dimension tables. So a star with branches. 

    Oh I also saw like a falling snowflake, like the table below connects with the table above and so on. Those are the branches that keep going from the main which is the sales data. 

    Assignment on table relationships 
    Hey there, 
    Ethan shared the data model you ve been working on, and we might have an issue 

    Last night I left my laptop open, and my cat Dennis somehow got his paws on our model. Now all the relationships are gone! 

    Could you please rebuild the model, including all three product tables? I owe you one! 
    -Dana 

    Objectives
    1. Delete all existing table relationships 
    2. Create a star schema by creating relationships between Sales, Calendar, Customer, Product and Territories tables. 
    3. Connect all three product tables (Product, Subcategory, Category) in a snowflake schema 
    4. Use the matrix visual to confirm that you can filter Order Quantity values using fields from each dimension table. 

    The first three are  quite easy. Eliminate with right click or manage > create the relationships by dragging the columns from sales which is the fact table to each table.
    Third step make a connection with the foreign key of subcategory which is in product and then as subcategory has the primary key of category make a relationship from subcategory to category. 
    Then and last, in the visual matrix the rows data is changed to review the order quantity by values of each dimension table example: Orders by year of calendar or occupation of customers, or category of products, model of product lookup, subcategory name and else.  

    Pro Tip Active and Inactive relationships 
    An example to learn about active or inactive relationships is the fact type Sales table which has more than one key or shared column with the calendar namely Order Date and Stock Date. 
        Both relations can be made but just one will be set to active the secondary inactive relationship will appear as a dotted line. 
            Prior to activate the secondary the first one must be deactivated. 
                Activation and deactivation can be accessed by double clicking the relationships and pressing the make primary button. 

    Relationship Cardinality
        So there are some simbols 1 to 1 or 1 to many (*), many to many. 
            1 to 1 it could be merged and left as is in the model as it is non redundant, but context plays a role here. 

            many to many. it usually is a mistake like duplicated ids. 
        

    Connecting multiple fact tables 
    If they share connection with a table it can be done. 
    If they share connection between them it can be done. 
    otherwise not really. 

    I continued making the model assigning the relationships to the second facts table: Returns Data table 
        And did some dinamic table in the report section of power By. 

    Filter Context & Flow 
    The arrow is the filter direction or filter context. information can just go one way. 

    Filter Flow 
    In the course it states: In this model the only way to filter both Sales and Returns data by Territory is to use the Territory Key from the lookup table, which is upstream and related to both fact tables. 

    ok so it is like going to spaces. If you stay in a table that has no connection to everything you want to see something will break. Therefore the scope should be upstream in a shared table between facts. not one sided to any facts table because the other facts table would not be able to connect. 

    So in view. The rows section should be in the common space such as the territory key in the territory table. 
        otherwise repetition would be seen mainly if we take rows out of one facts table column. 
            A dinamic excercise was made involving using different columns for the development of practical expertise.
    
    key question ¿In which table is the context? Sales, Territory or Returns? 

    Bi-Directional Filters 
    Changing filter direction to both allows filter context to flow in either direction. 
        To change it one must change the cross filter direction parameter to both. 

    wow this parameter allows the filter context to move. So just by changing the cross direction or bi direction of both relations we can see correct non redundant data out of any filter. 
    
    two way filters can introduce errors due to ambiguity. ok so it can lead to multiple flows which is a mistake, got it (requires seing the image of the model with the relations). 

    Pro tip. Try to design your models with 1 to many cardinality and in one way unless completely necessary. 

    Hiding Fields from report view
    Hide in report view option with right click on a table in the model makes the fields inaccessible from the report tab but still available in Data and Model views. 
        also can access it from properties as is hidden. 

    Pro tip: Hide the foreign keys in fact tables to force users to filter using primary keys in dimension tables. 

    Assignment
    Larry from sales sent me this screenshot. I think he must have downloaded our Power BI model and messed with some relationships, because I know we had sales for product 338. 
    Can you help diagnose whats going on, and prevent him from doing this again? 
    -Dana 

    Key Objectives 
    1. Replicate Larry's matrix below to diagnose what he must have done to the model 
        which product is 338? 
        why didn't larry's matrix show any orders? 
    2. Hide any remaining foreign keys to prevent other users from making the same mistake

    So the answer was making a filter flow bidirectional to make data not reach a filter context and lose data. 
    Larry applied a filter with the Product key of returns Data. A way to avoid him making that mistake is to hide that column as it should be acessed from Product key. 
    What hapenned was that yeah product 338 sold 50 times but no returns therefore when seeing it from that context it does not exist. 

    Pro Tip Model Layouts 
    Ok great so out of big complex models we can create partial views to see just the relations of a facts table at a time, as an example. Or returns. 

    Just grab a table and it will appear in the new layout. 
        Note that making any changes on the data in a layout will sync with the whole model 

    Selecting a table and right clicking in any background space will display the add related columns button. 
        That is a handy tool. 

    I did the same with the fact Returns table but then I eliminated both due to following the course. 

    Data Formats & Categories 
    In table tools tabs. 

    Adress, Date, Numbers, Categorical, 

    One thing is categories so the data type and the other the format which is how data is displayed. 

    Data format can be changed in the properties of model view but the author of the course
        prefers making changes in the table view tab. 
            One change applied was formatting to short Date the date fields in calendar, retruns and sales data tables. 

    So I changed decimal amounts, defined that country and continent are specifically that all in the table tools or column tools tabs. 

    Hierarchies 
    Groups of columns that reflect multiple levels of granularity 

    i.e. Geography hierarchy: Country, State, City 

    Make a hierarchy 
    In the model right click a column > create hierarchy > list the hierarchy in order. 
        Note: Hierarchies can be made in report and table view as well. In any place where the data panel is present. 

    In visualization in a matrix, you can add as the row data the complete hierarchy and it makes a dinamic nested organization.
        Options drill up and down appear. 
    
    On my data I saw country and region are redundant, same data so pretty much could get it out of the hierarchy. 

    Assignment: Hierarchy 
    Good morning! 
    Hoping you can help with a quick request. 
    Since we'll be going a lot of time-series analysis, Ethan asked us to add a date hierarchy to the model so that users can quickly view trends at any level of granularity (year, month, day, etc.)

    Please get that added before our afternoon call. Thanks! 
    -Dana 

    Key objectives 
    1. Create a new hierarchy based on the Start of Year field, and name it "Date Hierarchy" 

    2. Right-click or drag to add fields until your hierarchy contains the following: 
        Start of Year> Start of MOnth > Start of Week > Date 

    3. Add your new heirarchy to the matrix visual (on rows) and practive drilling up and down between each level of granularity. 

    pretty easy. 
    Go to model view. 
        In calendar table > column Start of year > Create hierarchy > Take start of month, week, date and rename it. 
            Go to report view and click on drill down and up to see the orders through time dinamically. 

    Data Model recap or best practices 
    1. Focus on building a normalized model from the start 
    2. Organize dimension tables above data tables in your model. 
    3. Avoid complex relationships unless necessary 
    4. Hide fileds from report view to prevent invalid filter context 


DAX analysis 
    Data Analysis Expressions (DAX)
        Adds calculated columns, measures, row & filter contex, iterators and more. 

    Topics to cover 
        DAX 101 
        Row & filter contex 
        Common functions 
        iterators 
        Columns & Measures 
        DAX syntax 
        Calculated Fields with Dax
        time intelligence 

    Goals 
        Introduce DAX fundamentals. 
        Learn when to use calculated columns and measures 
        Understand the difference between row context and filter context and how they impact DAX fx 
        Learn DAX formula syntax, basic operators and common functions categories (math, logical, text, date/time, filter, etc)
        Explore nested fxs, and more complex topics like iterators and time intelligence patterns 

    DAX 101 
    Is the formula language that drives the Power BI front end. 
    With dax you can 
        Go beyond the capabilities of trad spreasheet formulas, with powerful and flexible fxs built to work with relational data models. 
        Calculated columns (for filtering) and measures (for aggregation) to enhance data models
    
    Differences Between M and DAX 
    M and DAX are two distinct functional languages used within Power BI
        M is used in the **Power Query editor** and it is designed for extracting, transforming and loading data
        DAX is used in the **Power BI Front-End** and is designed specifically for analysing relational data models
            DAX considers filter context 

    Calculated column
    add new, formula based columns to tables in a model 
    specifically to entire tables or columns not a cell. 
        So you will see values for each row visible within tables in the Data view. 
    
    Cal cols are excelent to get properties on the data useless for aggregation (measures are the ones that work for agg) most times
    
    Pro Tip: Cal cols are used for filtering and grouping data, rather than creating aggregate numerical values. 

    Example: Making a cal col name Parent if children >0 Yes otherwise No. 
    Syntax: Parent = IF('Customer Lookup'[Total Children]>0, "Yes", "No")
        So by Parent yes or no we can filter, while
            by Sum(OrderQuantity) as Total Quantity all values would be the same in each row and therefore cannot. 
            It is advised not to use DAX for this. 

    On either table tools in table view or column tools when selecting a column or right clicking in a column, a button appears: New Column
    New column allows to input DAX to generate a column with a new filtering or grouping property

    Total Quantity = 
    Sum(
    'Sales Data'[OrderQuantity]) 
    This DAX is valid or invalid? 
        Invalid. It generates aggregation. That is for measures. 

    DAX measures 
    DAX formulas to generate new calculated values 
        Similarity also refer to entire table or column. 
        Difference: cannot be seen in table view just in report view or visualization. 
    Pro Tip: DAX measures 
    When a single row cant be the answer use it. It is intended for aggregate values or multiple rows in a table. 
    Use measures to create numerical, calculated values that can be analyzed in the "values"field of a report visual.
    
    Implicit vs Explicit Measures 
    Implicit measures are created when you drag raw numerical fields into a report visual and manually select an aggregation mode (Sum, Average, Min, Max, Count, etc.)
    Explicit are created when you write a DAX formula and define a new measure that can be used withing the model. 
        Difference? Implicit only in specific visualization. Explicit anywhere in the report and can be referenced by other DAX calculations to create measure Territories

    Making measures can be accesed in the home tab, modeling tab, or by right clicking a table in the data field. 
    Steps to create a measure (one of the above) > name the measure > select the aggregation > which column > in what table. 

    Quick Measures
    Automatically create formulas based on pre-built templates or natural language promtps 
    *Weighted averages, percent difference, time intellgence, etc. 

    The tab has Calculations and suggestions. 
    Templates and NLqueries respectively. 

    Protip 
    Quick measures can be a great learning tool for beginners or for building more complex formulas but use them with caution; mastering DAX requires a deep understanding of the underlying theory!

    Recap Cal cols vs Measures 
    Cal cols 
        calculated based on information from each row 
        Appends static values and stores them in the model
        Primarily used for filtering data in reports

    Measures
        Calculated based on information from any filters in the report 
        Does not create new data in the tables 
        Used for aggregating values in report visuals.  

     
    Pro Tip: Dedicated Measure tables
    It is a best practive to create a dedicated table to store your measures
        This will help you stay organized, find measures quickly and allow you to group related measures into folders. 

    Pro Tip:
    Click the filter incon on visuals to learn about the filters currently applied to a selected visual. 
    Always take note on the filter context that tells you about what data concludes or say. 

    Step by step measure calculation 
    Usually visuals do not have the entirety of data but rather layers. 
    i.e. black products on the facts table or drilled to a related table. 

    DAX syntax and operators 
    Total Quantity = SUM(Transactions[quantity])
    measure name = function name(tablename[columnname])

    Pro tip: 
    Column references use fully qualified names 
    Measure references just use the measure name and can be called by typing an open square bracket [Measure]

    DAX operators 
    Arithmetic
        Addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, exponent ^
    Comparison 
        =, >, <, >=, <=, <> not equal to. 
    Text/Logical operator 
        & concatenates two values to make one text string
        && between two logical conditions,
        || or  () ([]="")
        IN {}

    Common DAX function categories 
    Math & STATS   
        sum, average, max/min, divide/ count, countrows, distinctcount, iterators: sumx, averagex, maxx/minx, rankx, countx 
    Logical 
        if/then, if, iferror, and, or, not, switch, true, false
    Text 
        concatenate, combinevalues, format, left/mid/right, upper/lower, len, search/find, replace, substitute, trim
    filter 
        calculate, filter, all, allexcept, allselected, keepfilters, removefilters, selectedvalue
    Table 
        summarize, addcolumns, generateseries, distinct, values, union, intersect, topn
    Date & Time 
        date, datediff, yearfrac, year/month, day/hour, today/now, weekday, weeknum, networkdays, time intelligence: datesytd, datesmtd, dateadd, datesbetween
    Relationship 
        related, relatedtable, crossfilter, userelationship
    
        Actually more than 250 functions. This are the commons. 
    
    Basic Math & Stats functions 
    SUM =sum()
    Average =average()
    Max =MAX()
    Min same 
    Divide =DIVIDE(Numerator, Denominator, Alternateresult)

    General use of each was made making columns in measure table. 
    We applied dinamic tables changing the organization of rows by date into categories and subcategories allowing drilling into levels and using sums and average retail price as well as other calculated informative columns. 

    Counting Functions 
    Count *excludes boolean values 
    Counta *counts non empty cells, includes boolean values
    Distinctcount 
    Countrows =COUNTROWS([Table]) *the rest are pretty intuitive. 

    Dax Assignment
    Hey there, excited to start working with you!
    I'll need to pull some high-level metrics from our model to share with leadership, and I could use some help with the calculations. 
    For now, could you please create one measure to calculate the total number of distinct customers, and a second measure that we can use to calculate return rate (quantity returned/quantity sold)? Thank you! 
    -Dianne 
    Objectify the task 
    1. Calculate (new measure) total of distinct customers. 
    2. Calculate the return rate returned over sold. 

    Very interesting I used the customer column of sales data that is hidden in the report view as it is related to the orders. Not in the customer lookup table. 
    Actual solving code: 
    Total Customers = DISTINCTCOUNT('Sales Data'[CustomerKey])
    Return Rate = DIVIDE([Quantity Returned], [Quantity Sold], "No Sales")

    Pro Tip: Measures 
    When tiping "[]" in Dax measures will appear. 

    Conditional & Logical functions 
    IF #condition is met? = T if not then F.  IF(Logical Test, ResultifTrue, [ResultifFalse])
    IFERROR if there is an error display something stated. IFERROR(Value, ValueifError)
    SWITCH evaluates an expression against a list of values and returns one of multiple possible expressions. =SWITCH(Expression, Value1, Result1..., [Else]) 
    AND if more than 1 condition can use && 
    OR  similar can use ||. 

    I used IF to make a new column named parent if column total children of customer lookup is greater than 0 then "Yes" otherwise "No" 

    Switch Function 
    If it finds a value in a scalar expression then it will match to its according result. Example in the column MonthID if it is one it will give the result January and so on. 
    example code 
    Price Point = 
    SWITCH(
    TRUE(), 
    'Product Lookup'[ProductPrice]>500, "High", 
    'Product Lookup'[ProductPrice]>100, "Mid Range", 
    "Low"
    )

    Pro 
    Switch(True) is a common DAX patter to replace multiple nested IF statements :()

    Assignment on Logical functions
    Hey there! 
    Ethan has been working with the DS team on a customer segmentation analysis, and came back to us with a few requests. 

    Could you please add some new columns in our -customer table-
    to identify "priority" customers,
    segment customers based on income level, and group some of the education categories? 

    I've attached the logic to use, but reach out with any questions! 
    -Dianne  

    Objectives 
    1. Define Customer priority. >100000 = Priority else Standard
    2. Grouping variables based on income and education categories. If Eduaction Level is High School Education Category = High School, = Undergrad, = Graduate
        Income > 150000 = "Very High", >100000 = "High", >= 50000 = "Average", "Low"
    Customer Priority = IF('Customer Lookup'[AnnualIncome] > 100000 && 
    'Customer Lookup'[Parent] = "Yes",
    "Priority", "Standard"
    )
    The parent column addition was just for didactical purposes and was not explicitly required in the message from the assignment. 

    Second code. Based on income: 
    Income Level = 
    IF('Customer Lookup'[AnnualIncome] >= 150000, "Very High", 
     IF('Customer Lookup'[AnnualIncome] >= 100000, "High",
     IF('Customer Lookup'[AnnualIncome] > 50000 = "Average", "Low")))

    based on education 
    Education Category = 
     SWITCH(
     'Customer Lookup'[EducationLevel], 
     "High School", "High School", 
    "Partial High School", "High School", 
    "Bachelors", "Undergrad", 
    "Partial College", "Undergrad", 
    "Graduate Degree", "Graduate"
     )
     exploring the distinct string values can be a good idea to include all typos and avoid errors or false results. 

     Text Functions 
     LEN =len(text)
     concatenate =concatenate(text1, text2)
     UPPER/LOWER =(text)
     LEFT/RIGHT/MID =(Text, [NumChars]), =mid(Text, StartPosition, NumChars)
     SUBSTITUTE replaces an instance of existing text with new text in a string =substitute(text, oldtext, newtext, [instancenumber])
     SEARCH returns a position where a specified string or character is found. =search(findtext, withintext, [startposition], [notfoundvalue])

    Assignment: Text 
    Good Morning 
    Hoping you can help with a couple quick updates to the model: 
    1) Ethan wants to make the month abbreviations ALL CAPS to make them more readable in our reports 
    2) The product team asked us to break out the SKU category into its own field, which we can define as any characters before the first hypen ("-") in the ProductSKU col. 
    Thanks, reahc out with any questions! 

    Objectives 
    1 Month Abbreviations in ALL CAPS 
    2 sku category * before "-" of ProductSKU column 

    To solve in the DAX just place UPPER function outside of LEFT. 
    The second part to extract the value i used left and took the position -1 or before the delimiter

    SKU Category = 
    LEFT('Product Lookup'[ProductSKU], SEARCH(
       "-", 'Product Lookup'[ProductSKU]
    )-1)

    Basic Date & Time Functions 
    Today/Now 
    Day/Month/Year
    Hour/Minute/Second
    Weekday/weeknum sunday is the number 1 of 7 days. Not monday. You can add the number 2 to correct to monday as a start. 
    EOMONTH returns the date of the last day of the month with an extra argument of how many +/- months. 
    DATEDIFF
    
    Assignment Date & Time 
    Hey there, super easy one for you. 
    The customer segmentation project got me wondering if there are nay interesting patterns or insights based on customer age. 
    Could you please add a field in our customer table to extract only the year from the birthdate field? 
    -Dianne 

    Joining Data with
        RELATED
            Returns related values in each row of a table based on relationships with other tables 
            syntax =RELATED(ColumnName)
    
    Related works like a VLOOKUP function in Excel 
        - it uses the relationship between tables (defined by primary and foreign keys)
            to pull values from one table into a new column of another. 
    Since this function requires row context, it can only be used as a calculated column or as a part of an iterator function
    that cycles through all rows in a table (Filter, SUMX, MAXX, etc)
        in excel it takes extra steps to define the relationships. 
    Retail price and revenue were calculated 
    
    Calculate
    Evaluates an expression in a context that is modified by filters. 
    =CALCULATE(Expression, [filter1], [filter2]...)

    Protip 
    Think of cALCULATE as a filter modifier; it allows you to overrule existing report filters and "force" new filter context
        ok so it is as a go fish calculation. Interesting. 

    Example 
    Bulk Orders =
    CALCULATE(
       [Total Orders],
       'Sales Data'[OrderQuantity]>1
    )
    as a measure. 
    Other example 
    Red Sales = CALCULATE ([Quantity Sold], 'Product Lookup'[Product Color] = "Red")
    Generates a value of sold that are just red. 
    With calculate the context overrides previous so if on a matrix you are seing all colors but select the red sales only the red will display in every row, not the black or else. A repeating value. 
    Cannot be black and red at the same time as it is a filter context difference. 

    DAX measure totals 
    Measure totals may seem incorrect or inconsistent depending on how they are calculated, 
    because they dont simply add up the visible values in the report. 

    Distinctcount can be counted in several categories at the same time but just once on the total. Like a venn diagram an order may have 2 products therefore qualifying for 2 categories at the same time. 

    Assignment Calculate 
    Hey there, 
    Apparently George (our Product VP) has been speaking with some of the store managers, and they ve raised concerns about the number of bike returns they are seeing recently. 
    Can you please create a measure to calcultate total returns for bikes specifically, and let me know what you see? 
    Volume alone wont tell the full story, so lets calculate the return rate for bikes as well, and see how its trending before responding to George. 
    Need this ASAP -thank you! 
    -Dianne 

    Objectives 
    1. Calculate return rate for bikes. So returned/sold of bikes saved as Bike Returns.
    2. create a matrix to show Bike Returns by start of Month. What do you notice about the volume of bike returns over time? 
    3. Create a new measure named Bike Sales to calculate the total quantity of bikes sold, and add it to the matrix. What do you notice? 
    4. Create a new measure named Bike Return Rate using either Calculate or Divide, and add it to the matrix 
    5. How would you respond to the Product VP's concerns about rising bike returns? 
    Solution

    I made a Total returns by adding the returned quantities then made the following DAX to calculate the ones that are from bikes 
    Bike Returns = 
    CALCULATE(
       [Total Returns], 
       'Product Category Lookup'[CategoryName] = "Bikes"
    )

    Bike Sales = 
     CALCULATE(
        [Quantity Sold], 
        'Product Category Lookup'[CategoryName] = "Bikes"
     )
    Bike Return Rate = 
    CALCULATE(
       [Return Rate], 
       'Product Category Lookup'[CategoryName] = "Bikes"
    )
     Done. 

    The All function 
    Returns all rows in a table, or all values in a column, ignoring any filters that have been applied. 
    ALL(Table or Column, [Col2],...)

    Pro Tip 
    All function removes filter context. THis is often used in % of Total calculations, when the denominator needs to remain fixed regardless of filter context. 

    Example 
    All Orders =
    CALCULATE(
       [Total Orders],
       ALL(
           'Sales Data'
    )

    Assignment calculate & all
    Thanks for the quick turnaroun on that bike return analysis-crisis averted! 
    That got me thinking about how we could start analysing the return data in our reports. 
    Could you please help me create two new measures one to calculate all returns, and another that divides total returns by all returns. 
    That should allow us to see the % of returns by different products and product categories. 

    Objectives 
    1. Create the measure All returns
    2. Create % of All returns (Total returns by all returns)
    3. Matrix to show % of All Returns by product Category Name 
    Which category accounts for the largest percentage of returns? The smallest? 

    Solution 
    All Returns = 
     CALCULATE(
        [Total Returns], 
        ALL(
            'Returns Data'
        )
     )
    
    % of All Returns = 
    DIVIDE(
       [Total Returns], 
       [All Returns]
    )

    Then make a matrix on rows categories and on columns % of all returns. Accesories account for 62%. Clothing for 14% 
    Filter 
    Returns a table that represents a subset of another table or expression. 

    =Filter(Table, FilterExpression )

    Pro Tip: 
    Since Filter iterates through each row in a table, it can be slow and computationally expensive; only use Filter if a simple CALCULATE function wont get the job done. 

    Iterator Functions 
        Also called X functions
            loop through the same expression on each row of a table, then apply some sort of aggregation to the results (SUM, MAX, etc)

    Pro Tip 
    Iterator functions add a temporary new column to a table, calculate a value in each row based on a given expression, then aggregate the values within that temporary column (similar tu SUMPRODUCT in Excel)

    We are trying to transform calculated columns into measures to avoid redundancy. 
    I used SUMX and used original columns to calculate them passing them to the measures table. 

    Assignment Iterators 
    Hey, 
    Ethan asked for a quick analysis of company profit over the past few years, but im struggling with the calculation 

    We need a measure that multiplies order quantity by product cost
    Id like to do it without adding redundant columns to our Sales table. 
    Could you take a stab at this please? 
    -Dianne 

    objectives 
    1. Measure. Total Cost.
        multiplies the order quantitities in the Sales Data table by the product cost in the product lookup table. Then calculates the sum 
    2. Measure. Total Profit (revenue minus cost)
    3. Create a matrix to show Total Profit by Year. HOw much profit has AdventureWorks earned so far in 2022? 

    The formulas of each measure. And then the matrix of year and total profit. 
    1. 
        Total Cost = 
    SUMX(
    'Sales Data', 
    'Sales Data'[OrderQuantity] * 
    RELATED('Product Lookup'[ProductCost]))

    2. So just total revenue - cost 
    3. assemble the matrix by dragging the values Years to rows and Total profit to columns. 

    Time intelligence
    Performance To-Date =CALCULATE(Measure, DATESYTD(Calendar[Date]))
    Previous Period =CALCULATE(Measure, DATEADD(Calendar[Date], -1, MONTH))
    Running Total =CALCULATE(Measure, DATESINPERIOD(Calendar[Date], -10, DAY))

    Pro tip
    To calculate a moving average, use the running total calculation above and divide by the number of intervals. 

    Assignment
    The leadership team has been asking a lot of questions about month-over-month and year-over-year comparisons, and I've been pulling the numbers pretty manually. 
    Could you please add the following list of measures, to make these metrics easier to track and share with stakeholders? 
    Thank you!
    -Dianne 

    Objectives 
    Add the following measures to the model: 
    1. Previous Month Returns 
    2. Previous Month Orders 
    3. Previous MOnth Profit 
    4. Order Target (10% increase over previous month)
    5. Profit Target (10% increase over previous month)
    6. 90-day Rolling Profit

    I made a lot of measures and visuals with a cool slicer that modifies the information. 

    Know when to use calculated columns vs. measures
        use cal cols for filtering, and measures for aggregating values 
    Use explicit measures, even for simple calculations 
        explicit measures can be referenced anywhere, and nested within other measures 
    Use fully-qualified column references in measures.
        This makes your DAX more readable, and differentiates col references from measure references 
    Move column calculations "upstream" when possible 
        Adding calculated cols at the source or in Power Query improves report speed efficiency 
    MInimize the use of "expensive" iterator functions 
        Use iterators with caution, especially if you are working with large tables or complex models.
    
    Visualizations

    Build dynamic interactive reports 

    Best practices, explore features like bookmarks, drillthrough filters, parameters, tooltips, 

    Topics we ll cover
        Data Viz Best Practicas
        Bookmarks
        User roles 
        custom tooltips
        Formatting & Filtering 
        Report Interactions 
        Parameters 
        Mobile Layouts 

    Goals for this section: 
    Review frameworks and best practives for visu data and designing effective reports and dashboards 
    Explore tools and techniques for inserting, formatting and filtering visuals in the Power BI Report view 
    Add interactivity using tools like bookmarks, slicer panels, parameters, tooltips, and report navigation
    Learn how to configure row-level security with user roles 
    Optimize reports for mobile viewing using custom layouts 

    3 Key Questions
    1. What type of data are you working with? 
        geospatial, time-series, hierarchical, financial, categorical, funnel, survey, textual
    2. What do you want to communicate? 
        Comparison, composition, relationship, distribution 
    3. Who is the end user and what do they need? 
        Analyst, manager, executive, general public 
    End user dictates how the visuals are designed. 

    1. 
    Type of data generally determines which type of visual will best represent it. 
        geospatial - maps 
        time series - line 
        tree maps - hierarchical data 

    2. 
    comparison - column chart, clustered column, data table, heat map, radar chart, line chart, area chart *these last two for time series 
        compare values across time or categories
    composition - stacked bar, column chart, pie/donut, stacked area ts, waterfall chart (gains/losses), funnel chart (stages), tree map/sunburst (hierarchies)
        break down the component parts of a whole
    distribution - histogram, density plot, box and whisker, scatter plot, data table/heat map, map/choropleth (distribution)
        show the freq of values within a series 
    relationship - scatter plot, bubble chart, data table/heat map, correlation matrix
        show correlation between multiple variables

    3. 
    Analyst 
        Granular level to get to the root cause analysis. 
            Understand exactly 
    Manager 
        Summarized data, clear, actionable insights to operate the business 
            common charts & graphs, some detail only when it supports an insight 
    Executive 
        High level, crystal clear KPIs to track business health and topline performance at a glance. 
            KPI cards or simple charts, 
            minimal detail, unless it adds critical context to KPIs

    Dashboards design 
    Dashboards are analytics tools designed to consolidate data from multiple sources,
        track key metrics at a glance, and facilitate data-driven storytelling and decision making. 
            single centralized user centered tool 
    Product data, gross revenue, transactional records, customer data (CRM)

    Design framework
    1. Define the purpose 
    2. Choose the right metrics 
    3. Present the data effectively 
    4. Eliminate clutter & noise 
    5. Use layout to focus attention 
    6. Tell a clear story 

    a well designed dashboard should serve a distinct purpose for a distinct audience,
        use clear and effective metrics and visuals
            and provide a simple, intuitive user experience. 
    
    key Questions
    who are the end users? 
        what are the key business goals and objectives? 
            what are the most important questions they need answers to? 
                how can i present information as clearly as possible? 

    "Perfection is achieved not when there is nothing more to add, but when there is nothing left to take away" 

     Sketching the dashboard design 
     I inputed a logo 
     Made the spaces for the kpi with insert rounded rectangle 
     Then placed a vertical rectangle in all pages to set as a menu. 

     I have 4 main pages exec dashboard, map, product detail, customer detail. 
     
     In the exec dashboard I applied a lesson called naming and grouping consisting of seeing in the selection pane and changing the name of my shapes to KPIs after grouping them and the Navigation as well as the logo. 

     Then I added formatting to a card blue #20E2D7 mayus 1 decimal and copied paste plus replaced with each different KPI renevue, profit, orders and return rate. Funny enough the course does not have the same display of where things are but i could do all of the steps. 

     Assignment: Cards 
     Hey there! 
     We've kicked off the visualization work for our Power BI dashboard, and I'm hoping you can help. 
     For now I'd love for you to focus on building out the Customer Detail report. Can you start by adding some KPIs to show total customers and revenue per customer. 
     -Vic 

     Objectives 
     Insert a card in the Customer Detail report page to show Total Customers, and rename the field "UNIQUE CUSTOMERS" 

     Add a background shape and match the formatting of the cards in the Exec Dashboard tab 

     Copy and paste to create a second card showing Average Revenue per Customer, and rename the field "REVENUE PER CUSTOMER"

     Building and Formatting Charts 
     Build menu allows you to change the visual type, auto suggest visuals, and add data to customize chart components (x axis, y, legend, tooltips, etc)
        contextual menu *relevant to selected visual 
     you can select a visual type or drag a data type and let the program suggest.

     on object formatting by double clicking the chart object or right click > format, which allows you to select and edit individual chart elements. 

     Trend lines and Forecasts 
     in my version is in further analyses. After setting on the trend lines and forecast the confidence interval and the transparency was adjusted. 

     Assignment: Line Charts 
     Nice work on those cards! 
     Next up let's add a weekly line chart to show how our customer base is trending over time. 

     Please add a zoom bar to make it interactive, and format the tooltips to match the line chart in the Exec Dashboard. 
     Thanks!
     -Vic 

     Objectives 
     1. Add a line chart to the Customer Detail report showing Total Customers by week 

     2. Add a treend line and a zoom slider to the x axis 

     3. Enable tooltips, and format to match line chart in the Exec Dash board tab 

     KPI cards 
     Value revenue 
     Trend months 
     target previous month revenue 
     Direction higher is good which makes it green, should set to lower is good if its something like returns 
        nevermind set to gray due to higher experience, to avoid colorblindness conflicts or calling too much attention, apparently it was just relevant to see if there where loss of revenue so red stayed. 
    
     format to 30 pts, millions 2 decimals. 

     Bar and donuts charts
     Selected the donut visual. 
     Then added category name in the legend, total orders in the values
     it was looking great but then it certainly is true that bars are still more mainstream in conveying numbers and so the course led me to select bars. 
        Then i formatted the bars to gray, changed the title to orders by category, placed the labels outside the bars and removed the x and y labels and values as well as activated and modified the tooltips to white and blue color.

    filtering options 
    This is the main set appart feature that makes power bi stand from excel.
        It has 3 levels of filters 
            1. Visual level filters. apply to specific visuals 
            2. Page level filters apply to all visuals on the report page 
            3. Report level filters apply to all visuals across all report pages. 
                theres a small 4th one the drillthrough filter 
    filter types or filter logic
        all sorts of options.
            basic options with checkboxes 
            top n options 
            advanced conditional logic (text or value based)
     
     Assignment: Donut Charts 
     Good morning! 
     Just got a note from Ethan to see if we can build some demographic info into the customer report. 

     Lets add a couple donut charts to show the composition of customers by income level and occupation. We ll want to limit to just a few segments (maybe 3? ) and do some formatting to match the rest of the dashboard. 
     Thank you, you rock! 
     -Vic 

     Objectives 
     1. Add a donut chart to the Customer Detail report showing Total Orders by Income Level 
     2. Add a chart title, turn off the legend, and update the data labels toshow the category and value (font size 8,1 decimal place) 
     3. Update the colors of the slices to match the screenshot in the solution preview 
     4. Add a visual-level filter to exclude customers with a "Very High" income level 
     5. Copy the chart to show Total Orders by Occupation, and add a visual-level filter to display the three occupations with the most orders (bonus points if you use a Top N filter!) 

     Added a donut bar with filters on that visual of income levels and total orders
        then removed the legend, changed the title to orders by income level centered, 
            defined the labels to include the category, changed the colors of the slices, 
                and applied a segregating of very high segment at the filters level on the visual. *more than 3 slices is considered cluttered. 
    
    Table and matrix visuals 

        Table is less dynamic 

        Matrix allows for pivoting usually requires more fields of values or ordering.

        Definitely go for a little bit of formatting such as changing the style of the headers and removing the layout to none. 
    Conditional Formatting 
        Dinamically format table or matrix visuals based on cell values 

        Format pane, under Cell elements 

        Options include backgroundcolor, font color, data bars, icons, or web url. 

        Top N visual filter

    Assignment
        Tables 
    Hey there, this custoemr report is really coming together! 

    Since the management team needs a way to dentify high-value customer, lets add a table 
    to our report showing customer keys, full names, orders and revenue. 

    Proabbly makes sense to add some conditional formatting and limit to the top 100 customers for now. 

    Thanks! 
    -Vic 

    Key objectives
    1. Add a table to the Customer Detail report to show Customer Key, Full name, Total Orders *as Orders*, and Total Revenue * as Revenue
    2. Apply condiitonal formatting to add light gray data bars to the orders column and a white > blue color scale to the revenue column 
    3. Add a visual-level filter (Top N) to show the 100 custoemr with the most orders, and add a chart title (Top 100 Customers)
    4. Sort the table descending by orders

    Top N text Cards 
    Assignment 
    Hey, 
    Ethan is loving the customer report so far - great job! 
    He mentioned that hed like to highlight top custoemrs based on revenue as well, so I'm thinking we could add some text cards to show the top customer name, along with total revenue and the number of orders placed. 

    We'll be offering some coupons based on how much customers have spent in the past, so accuracy is critical here! 
    -Vic 

    Objectives 
    1. Add a card to the Customer Detail report to show Full Name 
    2. Add a visual-level filter (Top N) to show the top customer (FUll Name) in terms of Total Revenue
        What do you notice when you filter the report for low income customers? 
        (Hint check your value against the table)
        How could you modify the TOp N filter to correct this? 
    3. Copy and paste the card (x2) to show Total Orders and Total Revenue for the top customer 
    4. Add text boxes for titles and adjsut formatting to match the solution preview. 

    Map Visuals 
    powered by bing (require internet)
        Tips for creating accurate maps 
        1. Assign categories to geospatial Fields
        2. Add multiple location fields 
        3. Use latitude/longitude when possible

    may require a tenent of the data to give access to maps to use them in BI. 

    where are our adventure works orders coming from 
        broken down to the country level

    Slicers 
    Visual filters which affect all other visuals on a report page (by default)
        formats: lists, dropdowns, tiles, ranges, and more 

    categorical/text 
        level, tile, dropdowns. 

    Dates 
        between, relative date, after/before. 
    Numeric 
        single value, less than or equal, etc. 

    Note/Pro tip 
    There is a dedicated button to apply/clear all slicers. Gr8 for resetting when there are more than 1 slicer. 


    Assignment: Slicers 
    Hey there, quick request when you get a sec...
    Could you please add a slicer to the customer report, so that users can filter the entire page by year? 
    No preference for which specific type of clicer you use, as long as managers can filter customers for a specific year or across multiple years. 
    Thanks! 
    -Vic 

    Objectives
    1. Add a slicer to filter the Customer Detail report page by Year 
    2. Add a visual-level filter to exclude blanks 
    3. Choose any slicer style that allows users to filter individual years or across multiple years. 

    Pro tip: Hasonevalue 
    Apparently a slicer with one year selected having ties in revenue adds up and select the first name by alphabetical order. 
        Basically making a super user (fake without the context).

    Gauge Charts 
    It is going to be used to show the composition of the product. 
        I started by adding a slicer with the product names. 
            This way when i select a box only the details for that product will be checked. 

        Next inserting the gauge chart. 
            Then applied a Top N filter 1 with start of month as the filter and value to be filtered with option latest to see just the latest month orders. 
                Then place the order target measure to see how it compares with the actual results. And format it setting sizes, centered labels, dark gray blue font. 
            
            Conditional formatting based on if the target was met. 
                Made variables with < 0 = red as numbers would be negative relative to expected target. Dark gray otherwise. 
                Now values appear in red if below target. 

    Area Charts 
    I copied a line chart to recycle some formatting and then selected the area chart. 
        Then changed the time reference points to start of week and duplicated the graph to make one dedicated to weekly profit and the other to weekly returns colored in red due to the negative nature of returns. 

    Drill up and Drill down
    Allows to switch between different levels of granularity 
        Example drill up from weekly to monthly or down to daily. 
            facilitates not making several graphics. 

    Can be used in location using hierarchies to create interactive map visuals. 

    Assignment drill down 
    Hey again, just got some feedback from the managers about our customer report. 
    Chad loves the weekly tranding chart, but Thad wants to see the data by day and Vlad was hoping for an annual breakdown. 
    Instead of building multiple versions of the same line chart, could you please make it interactive so that Chad, Thad and Vlad get the views they want?
    Thanks! 
    -Vic 

    Objectives 
    1. In the customer detail report, update the X-axxis of the line chart to pull in Date Hierarchy 
    2. Use the chart header to drill up and drill down to explroe trends at each level of granularity 
    3. Test drill mode to change the granularity by selecting individual data points in the chart
        Why do some weeks look very low? 
    4. Turn off drill mode and show the chart at a weekly level of granularity by default 

    Drill through filters 
    Allow users to navigate to a specific report page, prefiltered on the item selected 
        Here we ve created a Product Detail page, set the type to Drillthrough, and configured drill through from Product Name 
            Now users can right click any instance of product name to navigate straight to the Product Detail reprot filtered on that product. 
    
    Allows to tie pages together. 
    Using drill through based on product name a product list slicer and a back button were eliminated and then used the tool.
        General information is displayed but we can go to exec dashboard click on a product drill through  and now the product detail is populated with information to the product level. 
    
    Editing Report Interactions
    Customize how filters applied to one visual impact other visuals on the page 
        cross filter. Include filter, highlight, none 
    
    Edit interactions is in the format tab, it is a button. 
    THe month revenue should not change based on data points so the cross reference was turned to none. 

    Cross filtering and top N may interact badly setting space for trade offs interactivity or filter quality. You get to choose. 

    Assignment: Report Interactions 
    Hey there, 
    I was playing the the customer report this morning and noticed some odd visual interactions. 
    For example, selecting a specific customer shouldn't filter the line chart, and proabbly shouldn't filter the donut charts either. 
    Could you please take a pass through the report interactions and update any that seem off? 
    THanks! 
    -Vic 

    Objectives 
    1. On the Customer Detail tab, edit the report interactions based on the following logic: 
        *when a filter is applied to the line chart, the donut charts shouldfilter (not highlight)
        *when a fitler is applied to the table, the line chart and donuts should not filter 
        *THe slicer should filter all visuals on the report page 
    
    Adding Bookmarks 
    Then capture the current satate of a page, and allow users to return to that state using report actions. 
        Bookmarks are used for clearing filters, highlighting specific insights, navigating reports, etc. 
    
    Goal: To make a simple way to return to the default unfiltered exec dashboard. 
        Added a bookmark to an unfiltered state. 
            Assigned the bookmark state to a button
                Added some style such as the cool blue on hover and white on default state. 
                    Ctrl click triggers the effect of removing filters. 

    Assignment
    Hey, 
    Now that you're getting pretty familiar with our customer data, are you noticing any interesting insights or trends that might be worth explicitly calling out in the report? 
    This could be a great way for us to use bookmarks to draw attention to some specific stories in the dashboard. While we're at it, let's add another one to clear all filters from the page. 
    Let me know what you think! 
    -Vic 

    Objectives 
    1. Explore the Customer Detail report by adjusting filters until you find an interesting inshight or trend 
        *Anything you choose
    2. Add a new bookmark to capture the current state of the report, name it: "Customer Insight" 
    3. Insert an Information button and add text to the button style to summarize what you've found 
    4. Assign a bookamr action to the button, and link to the Customer Insight bookmark you created 
    5. Create a second bookmark named "Clear all Customer Filters" which returns the page to an unfiltered state, and link it to a reset button. 
    6. Test both bookamrks using CTRL-click 

    Custom Navigation Buttons 
    It is about selecting icons that will help to navigate each report page. 

    Pro tip: Slicer Panels 

    Numeric Range Parameters
    Parameters allow you to create variables which can be referenced in measures and controlled via slicers. 

    There is also Fieds parameters 
        Both aim to add some interactivity. Lets see! 

    In the back parameter generates two measures. What you get to see is the interactive fields to place the input or description. 
        2 measures: generateseries(-1, 1, 0.1), Selectedvalue(Parameter[Parameter], 0)
            this for numeric range 
                so literally it generates a new table. ok. 
    A parameter example: Price Adjustmen with a slicer. Now an additional line in the chart describes how it would affect the profit. 

    A parameter was made. A slicer appeared but moving it still is not tied to any reflected change on measures or graphs. Lets change that. 
        To pass to connect the slicer value adjusted metrics should be made. Measures such as adjusted profit. 

    Adjusted Price, Adjusted Revenue and Profit measures were made. 
        Now lets visualize. 
            From area chart to line, add the Adjusted Profit new line and after formatting when changing the slicer a change in the line is also reflected.

        Great for what if scenarios or tests. 

    Fields parameters. 
         MOdeling > Fields > Select your Metrics > format to be single selection and size, font. > still not connected. Lets connect it! 
            In the graph the metric of the generated table is input into y axis and now it is connected. Time to format it to fit the dress code. Each slicer category was formatted in the graph to set to gray or red depending on the nature of the measure so return and "" rate were colored red. 

    Assignment: FIelds Parameters
    Good news and bad news... 
    The good news is that Chad, Thad and Vlad LOVE the drill options in the line chart -nice work! 
    The bad news is that now they can't align on what's the best metric to show. Chad likes seeing total custoemrs but Vlad is pushing for revenue per customer. 
    What do you think we should do? 
    -Vic 

    Objectives 
    1. Add a new Fields Parameter named "Customer Metric Selection" which includes TOtal Customers and Average Revenue per CUstomer. 
    2. Add the parameter as a slicer to the CUstomer Detail report, change the clicer style to Tile, turn off the header, update to single select, and resize to create a horizontal layout. 
    3. Select the DAX measure automatically created, and update the thext from "Average Revenue per Customer" to "Revenue per Custoemr" 
    4. Update the line chart Y-Axis to use the Custoemr Metric Selection parameter, remove the chart titel, and update the line colors to match the solution preview. 

    Pro tip Custom Tool tips
    