Recap of all the protips. 

 Calculated column best practices
    Table transformations and col calculations should ideally happen as close to the original data source as possible, to optimize performance and speed. 

Power Query Best Practices 
    Get organized before connecting and loading data. 
        Define clear and intuitive query names. 
        Organized file/folder structure. 
    Disable report refresh for static data sources. 
    When working with large tables, only load the data you need. 
        Dont include innecesary data. It slows the process. 

Data Model recap or best practices 
    1. Focus on building a normalized model from the start 
    2. Organize dimension tables above data tables in your model. 
    3. Avoid complex relationships unless necessary 
    4. Hide fileds from report view to prevent invalid filter context

---
Pro Tip 
    Rolling Calendars. 
    Based on the current data time. So it evolves.

Avoid unnecessary refresh load. 
Click on include in report refresh of each table it is a right click on the tables of power query editor to exclude static data or lookups. 
        This step avoids attempting to refresh data that has not changed. 

Model relationships 
Try to design your models with 1 to many cardinality and in one way unless completely necessary. 

Improve visualizations ease of use  
Hide the foreign keys in fact tables to force users to filter using primary keys in dimension tables. 

Model layouts 
Form partial views out of big complex models to see just the relations of each facts table at a time. 

Calculated Columns of DAX
Pro Tip: Cal cols are used for filtering and grouping data, rather than creating aggregate numerical values. 

Pro Tip: DAX measures 
When a single row cant be the answer use it. It is intended for aggregate values or multiple rows in a table. 


Protip 
Quick measures can be a great learning tool for beginners or for building more complex formulas but use them with caution; mastering DAX requires a deep understanding of the underlying theory!


Pro Tip: Dedicated Measure tables
It is a best practive to create a dedicated table to store your measures
This will help you stay organized, find measures quickly and allow you to group related measures into folders. 

Create a Dedicated Measure table 
Will appear in the model and is created by enter data into power query button. Name the table and start making the measures (enter data in report view). 
    Can be created using DAX directly in the model (but will not be visible in the model)
        The one created with DAX has like a calculator icon. 
        The DAX table was eliminated. 

Filter Context 
Measures are evaluated based on filter context. THey recalculate whenever the fields or filter around them cahnge. 

Pro Tip:
Click the filter incon on visuals to learn about the filters currently applied to a selected visual. 
Always take note on the filter context that tells you about what data concludes or say. 

Filter levels 
Can be on one page, on several pages, 

Pro Tip: Measures 
When tiping "[]" in Dax measures will appear. 


Pro 
Switch(True) is a common DAX patter to replace multiple nested IF statements :()


Protip 
Think of cALCULATE as a filter modifier; it allows you to overrule existing report filters and "force" new filter context
    ok so it is as a go fish calculation. Interesting. 


Pro Tip 
All function removes filter context. THis is often used in % of Total calculations, when the denominator needs to remain fixed regardless of filter context. 

Pro Tip: 
Since Filter iterates through each row in a table, it can be slow and computationally expensive; only use Filter if a simple CALCULATE function wont get the job done. 

Pro Tip 
Iterator functions add a temporary new column to a table, calculate a value in each row based on a given expression, then aggregate the values within that temporary column (similar tu SUMPRODUCT in Excel)

Pro tip
    To calculate a moving average, use the running total calculation above and divide by the number of intervals. 

Pro tip 
    There is a dedicated button to apply/clear all slicers. Gr8 for resetting when there are more than 1 slicer. 
